release-1.27: Add docs for enabling Istio native nftables feature (#1122)
istio-ecosystem/sail-operator: docs/common/istio-nftables.adoc

Many major Linux distributions are actively moving towards adopting native nftables support. 

=== Prerequisites

* *nftables version*: Requires `+nft+` binary version 1.0.1 or later.

=== Installation

The support for native nftables in Istio sidecar mode was implemented in the upstream istio https://istio.io/latest/news/releases/1.27.x/announcing-1.27[release-1.27].
It is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set a feature flag as `+values.global.nativeNftables=true+`.

==== Install in Sidecar Mode

When installing `Istio` and `IstioCNI` resources with the Sail Operator, you can enable nftables by setting `spec.values.global.nativeNftables=true` in the resource. This option configures Istio to use the nftables backend for traffic redirection instead of iptables.

. Create the `+istio-system+` and `+istio-cni+` namespaces.

[source,sh]
----
kubectl create namespace istio-system
kubectl create namespace istio-cni
----

[start=2]
. Create the `+IstioCNI+` resource with `+spec.values.global.nativeNftables=true+`:

[source,sh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f-
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: IstioCNI
metadata:
  name: default
spec:

>   version: v1.27-latest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  version: {istio_latest_tag}
```

[source,sh]
----
kubectl create ns test-ns
----

Enable sidecar injection for the namespace `+test-ns+` when using sidecar mode:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl label namespace test-ns istio-injection=enabled
----

As an alternative, enable ambient mode for the namespace `+test-ns+`:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl label namespace test-ns istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient
----

Deploy a sample application:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl apply -n test-ns -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/refs/heads/master/samples/curl/curl.yaml
----

Attach a debug container and you can see the nftable rules in the `+inet+` table:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl -n test-ns debug --image istio/base --profile netadmin --attach -t -i \
  "$(kubectl -n test-ns get pod -l app=curl -o jsonpath='{.items..metadata.name}')"

root@curl-6c88b89ddf-kbzn6:$ nft list ruleset
----

Verify the connectivity between two pods is working. For example, deploy a httpbin application using the following step:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl apply -n test-ns -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/refs/heads/master/samples/httpbin/httpbin.yaml

> kubectl exec -n test-ns "$(kubectl get pod -l app=curl -n test-ns -o jsonpath={.items..metadata.name})" -c curl -n test-ns -- curl http://httpbin.test-ns:8000/ip -s -o /dev/null -w "%{http_code}\n"

Author: It included httpbin deployment above. I am going to move that kubectl apply command to the prior step so that it will close to the step of deploying curl application.

200
----

More guidelines:
https://github.com/istio/istio/tree/master/tools/istio-nftables/pkg#debugging-guidelines[Debugging Guidelines]

=== Upgrade

The migration from iptables backend to nftables backend can be done by upgrading `+Istio+` and `+IstioCNI+` resources. 
Because the CNI component runs as a cluster singleton, it is recommended to operate and upgrade the CNI component separately from the Istio control plane.

When an existing Istio Ambient deployment using the iptables backend is upgraded to the nftables backend, IstioCNI doesn't switch to nftables silently.
The IstioCNI initialization code detects any iptables artifacts on the host first. If it finds them, it overrides the nftables setting, keeps using the iptables backend, and logs a message telling users to reboot the node to complete the migration.

> After a reboot, the old iptables artifacts are cleared and pods come up with clean namespaces, completing the upgrade and migration automatically.

Reviewer 2: Lets move this to the ambient section.

==== Upgrade in Sidecar mode

To upgrade an iptable based Istio service mesh with nftables backend, use the following steps:

. Check existing `+Istio+` and `+IstioCNI+` resources’ state are Healthy.

[start=2]
. Enable nftables by setting `spec.values.global.nativeNftables=true` in the `+Istio+` and `+IstioCNI+` resources. You can find the same example manifests in the Installation section above.

[start=3]
. Update the data plane namespace `+test-ns+` by restarting all deployments. For example,

[source,sh]
----
kubectl rollout restart deployment -n test-ns
----

==== Upgrade in Ambient mode

. Enable nftables with `+ambient+` profile by setting `spec.values.global.nativeNftables=true` in the `+Istio+` and `+IstioCNI+` resources. You can find the same example manifests in the Installation section above.

[start=2]

> . If you get the following IstioCNI log message like `To complete migration to nftables, reboot the node`, reboot each node. You don't need restarting application deployment pods because the Reconcile flag was enabled in Ambient mode IstioCNI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Restart the cluster nodes to complete the migration from iptables backend to nftables backend.
```

  ** link:#Upgrade[Upgrade]
    *** link:#upgrade-with-sail-operator-on-openshift[Upgrade with Sail Operator on OpenShift]
    *** link:#upgrade-in-ambient-mode[Upgrade in Ambient Mode]

=== Istio nftables backend

This document outlines the configuration steps for the nftables backend in Istio. As the official successor to iptables, nftables offers a
modern, high-performance alternative for transparently redirecting traffic to and from the Envoy sidecar proxy. 
Many major Linux distributions are actively moving towards adopting native nftables support. 

=== Prerequisites

* *nftables version*: Requires `+nft+` binary version 1.0.1 or later.

==== Installation

The support for native nftables in Istio sidecar mode was implemented in the upstream istio https://github.com/istio/istio/blob/master/releasenotes/notes/nftables-sidecar.yaml[release-1.27].
It is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set a feature flag as `+values.global.nativeNftables=true+`.

===== Install with Sail Operator on OpenShift

When you install IstioCNI and Istio resources with Sail Operator, you can create an instance of them with `+spec.values.global.nativeNftables=true+`. 

> This feature configures Istio to use the `+nftables+` backend instead of `+iptables+` for traffic redirection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When installing `Istio` and `IstioCNI` resources with the Sail Operator, you can enable nftables by setting `spec.values.global.nativeNftables=true` in the resource. This option configures Istio to use the nftables backend for traffic redirection instead of iptables.
```

To enable the native nftables feature, using the following steps:

> [arabic]

Reviewer 2: Not sure what this is for. Can you eloborate?

spec:
  version: v1.27.1
  namespace: istio-system
  values:
    global:
      nativeNftables: true
EOF
----

===== Install in Ambient Mode

The support for native nftables in Istio ambient mode was implemented in the upstream istio `+release-1.28+`. 
To enable native nftables in ambient mode, you can set the same feature flag with ambient profile. For example,

[arabic]
. Create the `+istio-system+`, `+istio-cni+` and `+ztunnel+` namespaces.

[source,sh]
----
kubectl create namespace istio-system
kubectl create namespace istio-cni
kubectl create namespace ztunnel
----

[arabic, start=2]
. Create the `+IstioCNI+` resource with `+profile: ambient+` and `+spec.values.global.nativeNftables=true+`:

[source,sh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f-
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: IstioCNI
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  version: v1.27.2
  namespace: istio-cni
  profile: ambient
  values:
    global:
      nativeNftables: true
EOF
----

[arabic, start=3]
. Create the `+Istio+` resource with `+profile: ambient+` and `+spec.values.global.nativeNftables=true+`:

[source,sh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f-
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: Istio
metadata:
  name: default
spec:

>   version: v1.27.2

Reviewer 2: same here

  namespace: istio-system
  profile: ambient
  values:
    pilot:
      trustedZtunnelNamespace: ztunnel
    global:
      nativeNftables: true
EOF
----

[arabic, start=4]
. Create the `+ZTunnel+` resource:

[source,sh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f-
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1alpha1
kind: ZTunnel
metadata:
  name: default
spec:

>   version: v1.27.2

Reviewer 2: and here too

  namespace: ztunnel
  profile: ambient
EOF
----

==== Validation

> When using the `+nftables+` backend, you can verify the traffic redirection rules using the `+nft list ruleset+` command in a data plane application or sidecar container. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using the `+nftables+` backend, you can verify the traffic redirection rules using the `+nft list ruleset+` command in any pod that is part of the mesh. 
```

root@curl-6c88b89ddf-kbzn6:$ nft list ruleset
----

Verify the connectivity between two pods is working. For example, deploy a httpbin application using the following step:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl apply -n test-ns -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/refs/heads/master/samples/httpbin/httpbin.yaml

kubectl exec -n test-ns "$(kubectl get pod -l app=curl -n test-ns -o jsonpath={.items..metadata.name})" -c curl -n test-ns -- curl http://httpbin.test-ns:8000/ip -s -o /dev/null -w "%{http_code}\n"

200
----

More guidelines:
https://github.com/istio/istio/tree/master/tools/istio-nftables/pkg#debugging-guidelines[Debugging Guidelines]

==== Upgrade

The migration from iptables backend to nftables backend can be done by upgrading `+Istio+` and `+IstioCNI+` resources. 
Because the CNI component runs as a cluster singleton, it is recommended to operate and upgrade the CNI component separately from the Istio control plane.

When using Sail Operator, the upgraded `IstioCNI` and `Istio` resources `spec.version` value need to be different from the prior instances. Otherwise, the appended `spec.values` will not be configured.

> ===== Upgrade with Sail Operator on OpenShift

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
===== Upgrade using Sail Operator
```

  version: master
  values:
    global:
      nativeNftables: true
EOF
----

[arabic, start=3]
. Update the data plane namespace `+test-ns+` by restarting all deployments. For example,

[source,sh]
----
kubectl rollout restart deployment -n test-ns
----

===== Upgrade in Ambient mode

To upgrade `+IstioCNI+` and `+Istio+` resources in Ambient mode, you can set the same feature flag with ambient profile. For example,

[source,sh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f-
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: IstioCNI
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  version: master
  namespace: istio-cni
  profile: ambient
  values:
    global:
      nativeNftables: true
EOF
----

[source,sh]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f-
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: Istio
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  namespace: istio-system
  updateStrategy:
    type: InPlace
  version: master
  profile: ambient
  values:
    pilot:
      trustedZtunnelNamespace: ztunnel
    global:
      nativeNftables: true
EOF
----

[arabic, start=3]
. Update the data plane namespace `+test-ns+` by restarting all deployments so that new rules can be applied. For example,

[source,sh]
----

> kubectl rollout restart deployment -n test-ns

Reviewer 2: hmm... we should find a way to support re-programming the new rules without having to restart the pods. Did you take a look at the code to understand what it does when config changes and the rules do not match?
